Function Subresources Templating for Serverless v1alpha2 (#15329)
kyma-project/kyma: components/function-controller/design/subresources_templates_proposal.md

> # Function Subresources Templating for Serverless v1alpha2

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Function subresources templating for Serverless v1alpha2
```

> ## Summery

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Summary
```

> The current Serverless API allows for limited ability to configure the generated functions subresources (deployment, build job). Additionally, it doesn't allow for separate configuration for build and functions resources except for memory/cpu resources.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The current Serverless API allows for limited configuration of the generated Function's subresources (deployment, build job). Additionally, it doesn't allow for separate configuration for build and Function's resources except for memory/CPU resources.
```

> This proposes changes to the current v1alpha2 Serverless API to support templating of function sub resources _without_ the need to rollout a new API version.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The current v1alpha2 Serverless API supports templating of Function's subresources _without_ the need to roll out a new API version.
```

## Motivation

Give Serverless users the ability to:
- Separate configuration for function deployments and build jobs.

> - Configure volume mounts for function subresources

Reviewer 2: Is there an additional use case for volume mounts not only for function deployment?

> - Configure volume mounts for function subresources

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Configure volume mounts for Function's subresources
```

> - Configure sidecars for function deployments (?)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Configure sidecars for Function deployments (?)
```
Do we need that question mark?

### Goals

- Add more flexibility to the Serverless API.

> - Provide a rollout plan to implement this functionality in small increments and avoid the need to rollout a new API version

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Provide a rollout plan to implement this functionality in small increments and avoid the need to roll out a new API version
```

### Non-Goals

> - Define a new Spec API version

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Define a new API version specification
```

## Proposal

> Use a modified version of [PodTemplateSpec](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/64ed9145452d2d1d324d2437566f1ea1ce76f226/pkg/apis/core/types.go#L3443) as a base for function build/deployment templates. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use a modified version of [PodTemplateSpec](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/64ed9145452d2d1d324d2437566f1ea1ce76f226/pkg/apis/core/types.go#L3443) as a base for the Function build and deployment templates. 
```

> A modified version is needed because we need to protect certain parts of the Pod spec (commands and args for the main container in the pod for example).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A modified version is needed because we need to protect certain parts of the Pod specification, for example, commands and arguments for the main container in the Pod.
```

The proposal doesn't include removing or moving any existing Spec fields and only adds non-breaking changes to the Spec. This ensure that there is no need to rollout a new API version and ensure backward compatibility with released v1alpha2 Spec/API.

## Design details

> Currently, we expose the following _relevant_ high level Spec fields:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently, we expose the following _relevant_ high-level specification fields:
```

- `Env`
- `ResourceConfiguration`
- `ScaleConfig`
- `Replicas`
- `Template` (Labels and annotations, currently not applied)

> The proposed functionality can be implemented by adding the two following fields to the spec:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The proposed functionality can be implemented by adding the two following fields to the specification:
```

- `RuntimeTemplate`
- `BuildTemplate`

*Note:* We should decide if we want to the implement this directly under the function Spec or grouped in a Spec field, e.g. `spec.Templates`.

Both fields will be of the modified version of the PodTemplateSpec.

Both fields will be optional. They should be defaulted based on the values of the high level Spec fields.

### Defaulting

> The high level Spec fields should be defaulted by the _defaulting webhook_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The high-level specification fields must be defaulted using the _defaulting webhook_.
```
Is there another option for defaulting? If not let's change should to must

> If the template fields are not set, they should be defaulted based on the high level Spec by the _function controller_. 

Reviewer 2: Why should we default template values?

Author: - I _think_ it would be easier to implement the reconciliation code this way. The controller will initially fill in the template based on the high level spec, defaults and/or user overrides, then the rest of the logic will only use the template spec during reconcile. This VS having reconciliation code that handles two specs based on what's defined and what's not.

- It will allow the user to _see_ the full spec in the CR. This allows users (and us) to have more visibility on the internal spec and ability to fine tune it as needed.

> If the template fields are not set, they should be defaulted based on the high level Spec by the _function controller_. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the template fields are not set, they should be defaulted based on the high-level specification by the Function controller. 
```

If the fields are partially set, the controller should fill them with the user defined values and default unset subfields based on the high level fields.

### Precedence

> The lower Spec fields should have higher precedence over the high level fields. This it would be possible to only override a limited set of the template subfields without having to fill out the full template.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The lower specification fields must have higher precedence over the high-level fields. This allows for overriding a limited set of template subfields without filling out the template completely.
```

> ### Version Conversion

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Version conversion
```

> The backward compatibility/conversion for these fields into v1alpha1 is not supported as we are moving away from v1alpha1.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The backward conversion for these fields into v1alpha1 is not supported as we are moving away from v1alpha1.
```

> ### Upgrades and Backward Compatibility

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Upgrades and backward compatibility
```

> The proposed changes should not cause any backward compatibility issues with _existing_ v1alpha2 functions created before releasing these changes. Worst case upgrade scenario should not be more than triggering a function rebuild due to Spec changes in the function and/or it's sub resources.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The proposed changes must not cause any backward compatibility issues with _existing_ v1alpha2 Functions created before releasing these changes. Worst case upgrade scenario should not be worse than triggering a Function rebuild due to specification changes in the Function and its subresources.
```

### Kyma Cli/Busola Support

> These fields should not be supported by Kyma Cli or Busola. The implementation will be complex on the client side, and it will have little value as this advanced feature is not likely to be used through these interfaces. Additionally, it will complicate the gradual rollout of the feature.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These fields should not be supported by Kyma CLI or Busola. The implementation is complex, and this advanced feature is not likely to be used through these interfaces. Additionally, it complicates the gradual rollout of the feature.
```

> ## Implementation Breakdown

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Implementation breakdown
```

> As high level breakdown of the required effort, it should be possible to implement and merge the following tasks individually into main. Trying to further breakdown the list would be great.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As the high-level breakdown of the required effort, it should be possible to implement and merge the following tasks individually into the main. The list is not complete and additional points can be added.
```

- Define and implement the modified `PodSpecTemplate` type.
- Add required defaulting logic to the controller (no changes in reconciliation).
- Refactor build job reconciliation to be based on the the build template.

> - Add Integration tests for build job reconciliation to be based on the build template.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Add integration tests for build job reconciliation to be based on the build template.
```
